CSS FlexBox Vs CSS Grid (#1015)
section-io/engineering-education: articles/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/index.md

When we talk about Flexbox and Grid layouts, we understand the concept of containers and items. In this case, a container is an HTML block that can contain other HTML elements.  An item is an HTML element that can be placed inside a container.

```html
<div>
    <div>One</div>
    <div>Two Two</div>
    <div>Three Three Three</div>
    <div>Four Four Four Four</div>
    <div>Five Five Five Five Five</div>
</div>
```

In this example, the `div` is a container element where other `divs` inside the main `div` are the container items.

This guide will discuss the differences and relationships that exist between Grid and Flexbox layouts.

To get along with this guide, prior knowledge of [CSS Flexbox](https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/a-guide-to-flexbox/) and [CSS Grid](https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/complete-guide-grid/) will be of great importance.

### What is CSS FlexBox

> It is a layout mode in CSS3. It gives a more proficient approach to designing, aligning, and disseminating space between items in a container to control their arrangement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flexbox is a layout mode in CSS3. It's a more proficient approach to designing, aligning, and disseminating space between items in a container to control their arrangement.
```

With Flexbox, we can arrange items left to right, right to left, top to bottom, or bottom to top and at the same time control the spacing, alignment, and order of items in the container.

> ### What is CSS  Grid

Reviewer: Remove spacing between CSS and Grid.

> CSS Grid is a collection of styles that allow you to control page layout based on rows and columns. In a Grid system, the containing elements are used to define a row within the layout. Then you apply class attributes to item elements that then span them over the desired number of columns. This allows you to create more complex nested layouts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CSS Grid is a collection of styles that allow you to control page layout based on rows and columns. In a Grid system, the containing elements are used to define a row within the layout. Then, you apply class attributes to item elements that then span over the desired number of columns. This allows you to create more complex nested layouts.
```

### CSS Grid vs CSS FlexBox

Let's have a look at some of the common differences between the two layouts.

#### One vs two dimensions

Flexbox arranges items in a one-dimensional layout. This can be either in rows or columns.

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/flex-horizontal-or-vertical.png)

A Flexbox layout fits best when aligning items either horizontally or vertically. It is one dimensional and can only fit a row or a column.

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/vertical.png)

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/horizontal.png)

> A perfect example of one dimensional is a header navigation bar or a footer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A perfect example of a one dimensional layout is a header navigation bar or a footer.
```

> Let's have a look at a simple example of implementing a header navigation menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's have a look at implementing a header navigation menu using Flexbox.
```

```html
<div class="nav">
    <div>HOME</div>
    <div>ABOUT</div>
    <div>CONTACT</div>
    <div>SIGN UP</div>
    <div>SIGN IN</div>
</div>
```

> Some CSS to style the header.

Reviewer: Replace full stop with a colon

```css
.nav {
    display: flex;
    background: seagreen;
    height: 50px;
    align-items: center;
    gap: 10px;
}

.nav div {
    color: whitesmoke;
    margin-left: 20px;
}
```

> 

Reviewer: Please correct filename to header

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/flex-hearder-nav.png)

> Having a header in your pages, you would probably lay its items in one direction. It is flexibly easier to implement this with a Flexbox layout as it arranges items in one direction. The menu is one-dimensional that perfectly fits well with `display: flex`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most common header layouts lay its items in one direction thus it's much easier to use Flexbox because it arranges items in one direction.
```

On the other hand, a Grid is a two-dimensional layout, meaning you can lay out items in rows and columns.

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/grid.png)

An example of a basic two-dimensional layout.

```html
<div class="container">
    <div class="item item1"></div>
    <div class="item item2"></div>
    <div class="item item3"></div>
    <div class="item item4"></div>
    <div class="item item5"></div>
    <div class="item item6"></div>
</div>
```

```css
.container {
    display: grid;
    grid-template-columns: 150px 150px 150px;
    grid-gap: 1rem;
    grid-template-rows: 150px 150px;
}

.item {
    background-color: #1EAAFC;
    color: #fff;
    border: 6px solid #171717;
}
```

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/grid-example.jpg)

> We specify a Grid with `display: grid` and then determine rows and columns with `grid-template-columns` and `grid-template-rows`. This defines a two-dimensional layout. In this case, each column and row take the size of `150px`.

Reviewer: lowercase grid

Reviewer: @kimkimani, can you correct this?

#### Content vs layout

> Flexbox is content-based. Content comes first. By content first means it help you align contents and move blocks and items within a container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flexbox is content-based so content comes first. By content first, we mean it helsp you align the contents of and move blocks and items within a container.
```

Reviewer: @kimkimani, please implement this suggested change.

> On the other hand, the Grid focuses on laying out the outer/skeleton layout of the page.

Reviewer: replace first the with CSS

To understand the content vs layout concept, let's go back to the header navigation bar design we've discussed above. We can target an item inside the header and determine where to display it.

> To get the core difference, Assuming we want to move the `SIGH IN` and `SIGH UP` menu to the left, we can do it using the Flex and Grid.

Reviewer: lowercase assuming. Sig**n** In and Sig**n** Up

Using Flexbox and CSS Grid.

> Using flex;

Reviewer: Flexbox:

```css
.nav {
    display: flex;
    background: seagreen;
    height: 50px;
    align-items: center;
    gap: 1px;
}

.nav div {
    margin-left: 20px;
    margin-right: 20px;
    color: whitesmoke;
}

di v:nth-child(4) {
    margin-left: auto;
}
```

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/flex-content-first.png)

> We specify the child item of the container and determine its position. That’s what we mean by referring to flex as content-based.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We specify the child item of the container and determine its position. That's what we mean by referring to flex as content-based.
```

> On the other hand, we can implement the same using the Grid. The header is one dimensional, and Flexbox is perfect for doing this, but we can do that with the Grid to differentiate between layout and content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, we can implement the same using CSS Grid. The header is one dimensional, and Flexbox is perfect for doing this, but we can do that with CSS Grid instead to differentiate between layout and content.
```

```css
.nav-grid {
    display: grid;
    grid-template-columns: repeat(10, 1fr);
    background: seagreen;
    height: 50px;
    align-items: center;
    gap: 1px;
}

.nav-grid div {
    margin-left: 20px;
    margin-right: 20px;
    color: whitesmoke;
}
```

> And the result looks pretty the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And the result looks pretty much the same.
```

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/grid-header-nav.png)

> But notice, we specify ten columns, each taking a fraction of one unit. To drive the point home, let's see how the Grid layout works under the hood.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But notice, we specified ten columns, each taking a fraction of one unit. To drive the point home, let's see how the Grid layout works under the hood.
```

> Use chrome to inspect the parent `div` element.

Reviewer: Capitalise Chrome (though you could just say web browser since all them have an Inspector tool)

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/grid-header-under-the-hood.png)

> This is awesome. The Grid show it's divided into ten cells. This where the concept of the layout first applying We define the layout and then fix items into the Grid cells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is awesome. We can see the grid is divided into ten cells. This is where the concept of layout first is applied. First, we define the layout and then fix items into the grid cells.
```

> Check this. If we were to move the items `SIGH IN` and `SIGH UP` to the left, applying `margin-left: auto`, as we did in the Flexbox example, won't work. This how we can do it using a Grid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check this. If we were to move the items `SIGH IN` and `SIGH UP` to the left, applying `margin-left: auto`, as we did in the Flexbox example, it won't work. This how we can do it using CSS Grid.
```

On the other hand, a Grid is a two-dimensional layout, meaning you can lay out items in rows and columns.

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/grid.png)
[***Image Source***](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MdPYenT89o4)

An example of a basic two-dimensional layout.

```html
<div class="container">
    <div class="item item1"></div>
    <div class="item item2"></div>
    <div class="item item3"></div>
    <div class="item item4"></div>
    <div class="item item5"></div>
    <div class="item item6"></div>
</div>
```

```css
.container {
    display: grid;
    grid-template-columns: 150px 150px 150px;
    grid-gap: 1rem;
    grid-template-rows: 150px 150px;
}

.item {
    background-color: #1EAAFC;
    color: #fff;
    border: 6px solid #171717;
}
```

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/grid-example.jpg)

We specify a grid with `display: grid` and then determine rows and columns with `grid-template-columns` and `grid-template-rows`. This defines a two-dimensional layout. In this case, each column and row take the size of `150px`.

> 

Author: @louisefindlay23 which lowercase grid occurrence are you referencing? I had already fixed this.

#### Content vs layout

Flexbox is content-based; content comes first. By content first, we mean it helps you align the contents of and move blocks and items within a container.

> 

Author: I think I had already fixed this @louisefindlay23.  `content-based; content comes`  i didn't include `Flexbox is content-based so content comes first` as you suggested. This was highlighted by Grammarly, and I update it as suggested by Grammarly. Moreover  `Flexbox is content-based so content comes first` need `content`  to be denoted with an article `the` as  `Flexbox is content-based so the content comes first`. And this is how Grammarly suggests for that sentence `Flexbox is content-based, so the content comes first.`

But either way, I've updated that section as you suggested.

On the other hand, the CSS Grid focuses on laying out the outer/skeleton layout of the page.

To understand the content vs layout concept, let's go back to the header navigation bar design we've discussed above. We can target an item inside the header and determine where to display it.

To get the [core difference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9zA8cB-54SA), Assuming we want to move the `Sign In` and `Sign Up` menu to the left, we can do it using Flexbox and CSS Grid.

Using Flexbox;

```css
.nav {
    display: flex;
    background: seagreen;
    height: 50px;
    align-items: center;
    gap: 1px;
}

.nav div {
    margin-left: 20px;
    margin-right: 20px;
    color: whitesmoke;
}

di v:nth-child(4) {
    margin-left: auto;
}
```

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/flex-content-first.png)

We specify the child item of the container and determine its position. That's what we mean by referring to Flexbox as content-based.

On the other hand, we can implement the same using CSS Grid. The header is one dimensional, and Flexbox is perfect for doing this, but we can do that with CSS Grid instead to differentiate between layout and content.

```css

> .nav-grid {

Reviewer: @kimkimani, before you used the .nav class for the HTML but now you are using .nav-grid. You should mention this change to readers.

```css
.gap {
    display: flex;
    border: 3px solid rgba(6, 109, 243, 0.911);
    flex-wrap: wrap;
    column-gap: 6px;
    max-width: 800px;
}

.gap>div {
    background-color: rgba(10, 129, 209, .5);
    border: 1px solid #000;
    color: #000;
    padding: 20px;
    font-size: 150%;
}
```

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/column-gap.png)

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/column-gap-wrapped.png)

When we apply the wrap, we force Flexbox to create rows and columns on small screens. We can use `row-gap` to create gutter around them too.

```css
.gap {
    display: flex;
    border: 3px solid rgba(6, 109, 243, 0.911);
    flex-wrap: wrap;
    column-gap: 6px;
    row-gap: 6px;
    max-width: 800px;
}

.gap>div {
    background-color: rgba(10, 129, 209, .5);
    border: 1px solid #000;
    color: #000;
    padding: 20px;
    font-size: 150%;
}
```

![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/column-gap-row-gap.png)

**The shorthand**

To create spacing between rows and columns, we can use gaps and specify the units of both. For example, `gap: 6px 6px` and we will get the same results as applying `column-gap: 6px` and `row-gap: 6px`.

> ![](/engineering-education/css-flexbox-vs-css-grid/column-gap-row-gap.png)

Reviewer: @kimkimani, I couldn't replicate this image with the above code. The grid items are still all in one row instead of in a 3x3 grid. Is this the expected behaviour?
